Chapter 1. Introduction
Chapter 2. Medical device safety
2.1 Medical device safety and risk management
2.2 Effectiveness/performance of medical devices
2.3 Phases in the life span of a medical device
2.4 Participants in ensuring the safety of medical devices
2.5 The role of each participant/stakeholder
2.6 Shared responsibility for medical device safety and performance
Chapter 3. Governmental regulation of medical devices
3.1 Critical elements for regulatory attention
3.2 Stages of regulatory control
3.3 A common framework for medical device regulations
3.4 Regulatory tools and general requirements
3.4.1 Product control
3.4.2 Vendor establishment control
3.4.3 Post-market surveillance/vigilance
3.4.4 Quality system requirements
Chapter 4. Global Harmonization Task Force (GHTF)
4.1 Objectives
4.2 Scope of the four GHTF study groups
4.3 Benefits of the GHTF
4.4 Final documents from the GHTF
4.5 Global Medical Device Nomenclature (GMDN)
Chapter 5. Standards
5.1 What are standards?
5.2 Why do we need standards?
5.3 Voluntary and mandatory standards
5.4 Standards development process
5.5 Conformity assessment with standards
5.6 National and international standards systems
5.7 Identification of standards
5.8 Current trends in the use of standards in medical device regulations 22
Chapter 6. Optimizing the use of regulatory resources
6.1 Increasing knowledge of the medical device sector6.2 Establishing basic regulatory programmes
6.2.1 Basic legislation
6.2.2 Sharing problem reports
6.3 Drafting a comprehensive policy or guideline on medical device
management
6.3.1 Advantages of a national policy
6.3.2 Classification of medical devices
6.3.3 Medical device product control
6.3.4 Product representation control
6.3.5 Vendor establishment control
6.3.6 The control of home-use, refurbished, and donated devices
6.3.7 The re-use of medical devices that are labelled “for single use”29
6.3.8 Post-market surveillance
6.3.9 Recognition and use of established national or
international standards
6.4 Promoting compliance and cooperation
6.5 Setting priorities for regulatory programme development
6.6 Cautions in interpreting medical device “export certificates”
Chapter 7. Priorities on the international agenda


MEDICAL DEVICE REGULATIONSForeword
The term medical devices covers a vast range of equipment, from simple tongue depressors
to haemodialysis machines. Like medicines and other health technologies, they are essential
for patient care – at the bedside, at the rural health clinic or at the large, specialized
hospital.
Medical devices also cost governments a substantial amount of money. In 2000, the
estimated one and a half million different medical devices available on the market
represented over US$145 billion. With innovation and the rapid advancement of
technologies, medical devices are currently one of the fastest growing industries, and the
global market figure for 2006 is expected to exceed US$260 billion.
Yet many countries lack access to high-quality devices and equipment that are
appropriate for their specific epidemiological needs. This is particularly true in developing
countries, where health technology assessments are rare and where little regulatory controls
exist to prevent the importation or use of substandard devices. With the vast majority of
devices in developing countries being imported, this leaves them prey to unscrupulous
market influences and puts patients’ lives at risk.
Governments need to put in place policies that will address all elements related to
medical devices, ranging from access to high quality, affordable products, through to
their safe and appropriate use and disposal. The health technology life cycle diagram
(back cover) illustrates the policy process that needs to be in place. However, policies will
be unsuccessful unless they are translated into national regulations that are enforced by
legislation and correlating sanctions, and that form an integral part of the overall national
health system.
Surprisingly, regulatory controls for medical devices are scarce in the developing world,
even though implementation of national medical device regulations will often address the
very issues raised in countries as major concerns for patient safety. Examples of these
issues include the illegal re-processing and re-packaging of used syringes for re-sale; the
availability on the market of equipment that fails minimum quality and safety standards;
or simply no trace of what devices are being sold in the country, nor by whom. Such a
listing is essential to enable governments to issue alerts or recalls for unsafe or ineffective
items.
The purpose of this publication is to provide guidance to Member States wishing to
create or modify their own regulatory systems for medical devices. It is recognized that
there is no single template that will respond to the needs of every country. Some countries
may have production facilities that will require good manufacturing practice and complex
quality controls; others may depend principally on the donation of equipment from external
sources and need different policies to protect their population against unsafe and
inappropriate technology. Resources, both human and financial, remain a significant factor
in the progressive development of national regulatory authorities. Nevertheless, there are
many ways that governments can benefit from the wealth of experience of others, andstart to build efficient medical device regulatory systems. This publication highlights the
most important of these.
In essence, governments are encouraged to follow the growing movement towards
harmonized regulatory systems because a proliferation of different national regulations
increases costs, hinders access to health care technologies, and can even unwittingly
jeopardize the safety of the patient.
Secondly, Member States can adopt where appropriate the device approvals of the
advanced regulatory systems, since this process represents a vast, and often unnecessary
drain on scarce resources.
This will allow countries with weak regulatory systems to place emphasis and initial
resources on areas such as vendor and device registration, training, and surveillance and
information exchange systems on the assessment of medical devices in use.
WHO is reinforcing its role in providing technical support to Member States who wish
to implement improved medical device regulatory systems. We hope that this guide provides
a useful framework within which countries can assess and address their needs to protect
their populations from the risks of unsafe technology.

Glossary
Note on the definition of medical devices
The term “medical devices” includes everything from highly sophisticated computerized
medical equipment down to simple wooden tongue depressors. The intended primary
mode of action of a medical device on the human body, in contrast with that of medicinal
products, is not metabolic, immunological, or pharmacological.
Several different international classification systems for medical devices are still in use
in the world today. The World Health Organization, with its partners, is working towards
achieving harmonization in medical device nomenclature, which will have a significant
impact on patient safety (see section 4.5). This is particularly important to be able to
identify adverse incident reports and recalls.
The Global Harmonization Task Force has proposed the following harmonized definition
for medical devices (see GHTF document SG1/N029R11).
“Medical device” means any instrument, apparatus, implement, machine, appliance,
implant, in vitro reagent or calibrator, software, material or other similar or related
article, intended by the manufacturer to be used, alone or in combination, for human
beings for one or more of the specific purposes of:
• diagnosis, prevention, monitoring, treatment or alleviation of disease
• diagnosis, monitoring, treatment, alleviation of or compensation for an injury
• investigation, replacement, modification, or support of the anatomy or of a
physiological process
• supporting or sustaining life
• control of conception
• disinfection of medical devices
• providing information for medical purposes by means of in vitro examination of
specimens derived from the human body and which does not achieve its primary
intended action in or on the human body by pharmacological, immunological or
metabolic means, but which may be assisted in its function by such means.
Note: An accessory is not considered to be a medical device. However, where an
accessory is intended specifically by its manufacturer to be used together with the
‘parent’ medical device to enable the medical device to achieve its intended purpose,
it should be subject to the same procedures and GHTF guidance documents as apply
to the medical device itself.
Note: The definition of a device for in vitro examination includes, for example,
reagents, calibrators, sample collection devices, control materials, and relatedinstruments or apparatus. The information provided by such an in vitro diagnostic
device may be for diagnostic, monitoring or compatibility purposes. In some
jurisdictions, reagents and the like may be covered by separate regulations.
Note: Products, which are considered to be medical devices in some jurisdictions
but for which there is not yet a harmonized approach, are:
• aids for disabled/handicapped people
• devices for the treatment/diagnosis of diseases and injuries in animals
• spare parts for medical devices
• devices incorporating animal and human tissues which may meet the requirements
of the above definition but be subject to different controls.
A country may develop its own guidance document for any detailed descriptions they
may require.


Terms in regulations are legally binding and therefore have restricted meanings. For
example, manufacturer, distributor, vendors, retailers all have precise definitions in
regulations, and their definitions vary in the regulations of different countries. A regulation
normally has an accompanying list of definitions of terms used. A harmonized definition
of many important terms such as performance, effectiveness, vigilance and incidents, are
still under development.
This guideline, however, is written to promote a general understanding of medical
device issues and their regulations. Therefore, the words used here are non-binding but
carry general meanings.
Adverse Event a problem that can or does result in permanent impairment, injury or
death to the patient or the user.
Effectiveness a device is clinically effective when it produces the effect intended by the
manufacturer relative to the medical conditions. For example, if a device is intended
for pain relief, one expects the device to actually relieve pain and would also expect
the manufacturer to possess objective evidence, such as clinical test results, that the
device does in fact relieve pain. Effectiveness can be thought of as efficacy in the real
world clinical environment.
Efficacy not used in this guideline, generally means effectiveness under an ideal controlled
setting.
Incident an unusual (unexpected) event associated with the use of a medical device.
May or may not lead to problems. All incidents should be investigated for potential
problems (see section 6.3.8).


Manufacturer
any person who produces medical devices.
Performance
means technical performance plus effectiveness (see section 2.2).
Person
includes an establishment (in that case, person-in-charge or person responsible).
Placing on-market “Pre-market” and “post-market” are established regulatory terms.
“Post-market” really refers to when the products are on the market. “Placing onmarket” aims to distinguish the regulations governing the commercial aspectscommensurate with the life span diagram (a memory anchor used in this publication).
“Placing on-market” also provides a convenient reference for countries that wish to
establish regulatory programmes.
Post-market surveillance and vigilance The different terms in post-market surveillance
are currently used by different countries with varying meanings. The Global
Harmonization Task Force is in the process of defining the different terms. This
Guide uses the US FDA terms which are well described on the internet (www.fda.gov/
cdrh/postsurv/).
In this Guide post-market surveillance is a broad term that covers any and all
monitoring activities including the vigilance system for medical devices in use.
In Europe, vigilance concerns the responsability of the manufacturer to inform the
competent authority of incidents, according to national/European legislation.
Problem a broad term that covers possible faults of the device, difficulties in using the
device or an undesirable outcome associated with the use of the device. A problem
may not lead to an adverse event but corrective or preventive actions are required.
Vendor any person who sells medical devices. This person could be a manufacturer, an
importer, a distributor, a wholesaler, or a retailer.

CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The regulation of medical devices is a vast and rapidly evolving field that is often
complicated by legal technicalities. For example, legal terms and their meanings are
sometimes non-uniform even within one regulatory system. In an attempt to make this
complex subject easier to grasp, this Guide presents a common framework that integrates
the regulatory systems of the five countries or regions with the most advanced medical
device regulations. Non-technical language, graphics, tables and memory anchors are
used to present an overview of medical device safety issues and regulatory philosophy.
The Guide begins by explaining how safety is a risk management issue, and how
optimum safety and performance require cooperation among all who are involved in the
life span of a medical device. The critical elements of medical device regulations are
illustrated using a common framework for regulatory development; as well as the current
regulatory tools of the Global Harmonization Task Force (GHTF) and all the key
documents it has issued in the past three years.
Understanding the different phases in the life span of a medical device and the common
framework are first steps to successful harmonization and simplification worldwide.


Summary of contents
Chapter 2 describes the nature of medical device safety as a risk management process that
must encompass the life span of medical devices from their conception to disposal. A Life
Span Diagram facilitates understanding and serves as a memory anchor. Optimum safety
and performance require cooperation among all those involved in the life span of a medical
device: the manufacturer, importer/vendor, government, user and public – each has a
specific role to play in risk management.
Chapter 3 considers the role of the government. The critical elements of the life span of
medical devices that require regulatory attention are highlighted. A common regulatory
framework is proposed integrating the five regulatory systems with the most advanced
medical device regulations, along with the applicable regulatory tools.
Chapter 4 introduces the work of the Global Harmonization Task Force (GHTF), whose
mission is to harmonize the implementation of medical device regulations across the globe.
The objectives of its four Study Groups as they relate to the Medical Device Life Span
Diagram are described. In order to facilitate ease of reference for countries wishing to
adopt them, Annex 2 provides a summary of all final GHTF documents as they relate to
the common regulatory framework.
Chapter 5 provides an introduction to standards. It describes the use of voluntary standards
and their increasing prominence in medical device regulation. Countries are urged to
establish national standards management systems and, where possible, to adopt
international standards and to participate in their development and amendment.

Chapter 6 suggests various steps for governments seeking to establish an affordable
regulatory programme from the ground up for ensuring the safety and performance of
medical devices. The need for knowledge, policies, legislation and enforcement of medical
device safety is discussed. Governments are encouraged to avoid setting up resource
demanding “pre-market” regulations, but rather to take advantage of existing approval
systems and international standards. An explanation of the meaning of different medical
device “export certificates” is offered. Cooperation from all stakeholders is encouraged
to increase programme effectiveness while reducing regulatory costs.
Chapter 7 proposes two actions that could be undertaken at the international level to
address priority needs for product control and their safe and effective use:
i) The establishment of a uniform certification format that will be used globally so that
different countries can certify that medical devices being exported comply with their
domestic regulatory requirements. This certification will help the importing countries
to regulate medical devices.
ii) Support for a centre to coordinate and relay medical device problems, recalls, and
alerts to the global community. This will enhance the safety and performance of medical
devices in use around the world.
Annexes 1–4 also provide a selection of further reading and information on the issues
raised in this publication.


MEDICAL DEVICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 2
Medical device safety
The optimum assurance of medical device safety has several essential elements:
• Absolute safety cannot be guaranteed
• It is a risk management issue
• It is closely aligned with device effectiveness/performance
• It must be considered throughout the life span of the device
• It requires shared responsibility among the stakeholders
Each of these features is discussed below.


2.1 Medical device safety and risk management
Safety can only be considered in relative terms. All devices carry a certain degree of risk
and could cause problems in specific circumstances. Many medical device problems cannot
be detected until extensive market experience is gained. For example, an implantable
device may fail in a manner that was not predictable at the time of implantation; the
failure may reflect conditions unique to certain patients. For other devices, component
failure can also be unpredictable or random. The current approach to device safety is to
estimate the potential of a device becoming a hazard that could result in safety problems
and harm. This estimate is often referred to as the risk assessment.
Hazard is a potential for an adverse event, a source of danger. Risk is a measure of the
combination of (1) the hazard; (2) the likelihood of occurrence of the adverse event; (3)
the severity or overall impact. Risk assessment begins with risk analysis to identify all
possible hazards, followed by risk evaluation to estimate the risk of each hazard. In
general, risk assessment is based on experience, evidence, computation, or even guesswork.
Risk assessment is complex, as it can be influenced by personal perception and other
factors such as cultural background, economic conditions, and political climates.
In practice, risk assessment of medical devices is based on the experience of health care
professionals and on safety design engineering. In the United States, governmental risk
assessment of medical devices is based mainly on recommendations from members of 16
medical specialty panels, and devices are categorized into three classes. In the European
Union and Canada, the classification schemes for medical devices are predominantly rulebased. These rules categorize medical devices according to their perceived potential hazards.
Canada assigns four classes of devices. The European Union assigns three classes with
class II being sub-divided into IIa and IIb (effectively, also four classes). The Global
Harmonization Task Force (GHTF) is proposing a harmonized scheme for medical device
classification (see www.GHTF.org document SG1/N015R18).
In classifying devices, potential areas of hazard that warrant consideration include the
degree of invasiveness, duration of contact, the body system affected, and local versussystemic effects. An invasive device is usually considered to have higher potential hazard
than an equivalent non-invasive device (e.g. there are invasive and non-invasive blood
pressure monitors). Similarly, devices that have a long duration of contact, that affect
vital organs such the heart or the great arteries, or that have systemic effects are assigned
higher classes of potential hazard or risk. The degree of regulation imposed on any device
is proportional to its potential hazard. This approach is known as risk management.
The first requirement of the “Essential principles of safety and performance of medical
devices” recommended by the GHTF (SG1-N020R5) illustrates such an approach. It states
that:
Medical devices should be designed and manufactured in such a way that, when
used under the conditions and for the purposes intended and, where applicable, by
virtue of the technical knowledge, experience, education or training of intended
users, they will not compromise the clinical condition or the safety of patients, or
the safety and health of users or, where applicable, other persons, provided that any
risks which may be associated with their use constitute acceptable risks when weighed
against the benefits to the patient and are compatible with a high level of protection
of health and safety.
This statement highlights the risk/benefit nature of medical devices. The goal, therefore,
is to maximize benefit and minimize risk. Manufacturers of medical devices also use the
risk management approach. The International Organization for Standardization (ISO)
has produced a document (ISO 14971:2000) providing manufacturers with a framework
including risk analysis, risk evaluation and risk control for risk management in medical
device design, development, manufacturing as well as for monitoring the safety and
performance of the device after sale.


2.2 Effectiveness/performance1 of medical devices
Every device has a designed purpose. A device is clinically effective when it produces the
effect intended by the manufacturer relative to the medical condition. For example, if a
device is intended for pain relief, one expects the device to actually relieve pain and would
also expect the manufacturer to possess objective, scientific evidence, such as clinical test
results, that the device does in fact relieve pain.
Clinical effectiveness is a good indicator of device performance. Performance, however,
may include technical functions in addition to clinical effectiveness. For example, an alarm
feature may not directly contribute to clinical effectiveness but would serve other useful
purposes. Furthermore, it is easier to measure objectively and quantify performance than
clinical effectiveness.
Performance is closely linked to safety. For example, a blood collection syringe with a
blunt needle would perform badly for collecting blood and could inflict injury. A patient
monitor that does not perform well could pose serious clinical safety problems to the
patient. Thus, the safety and performance of medical devices are normally considered
together.
The above discussion highlights the inherent risk of a medical device. It is incumbent
on the medical device manufacturer to demonstrate that all possible risks associated with
the device are identified and adequately addressed. The role of the regulatory authority is
to ensure that the manufacturer has effectively implemented the risk management process


The terms “performance”, “effectiveness” and “efficacy” are commonly used in association with medical
devices. Here, effectiveness means clinical effectiveness as described below. Performance means technical
performance plus clinical effectiveness. Efficacy, not used here, generally means effectiveness under an ideal
controlled setting.

and fulfilled other regulatory requirements. The following section expands this issue and
illustrates how other aspects in the life span of medical devices can affect their safety and
performance.


2.3 Phases in the life span of a medical device
Figure 1 illustrates the major phases in the life span of a medical device from conception
and development to disposal. The activity phases are simplified to make it easier to
understand the regulatory system. For example, the development phase includes
development planning, design verification/validation, prototype testing and clinical trials.
In practice, the phases outlined below may overlap and interact.


It is important to recognize that any of these phases can affect the safety and performance
of a medical device. Examples of how each phase can create health hazards are described
below:
1. Conception and development
The scientific principles upon which a device is based are fundamental to its safety and
performance. For example, a cardiac pacemaker should deliver a minute electrical impulse
of a certain size and shape that simulates the natural functioning of the heart. Significant
deviation from this may compromise safety and performance.
The more complex the device, the higher the risk of user error. Soundness of concept
and adequacy of design, construction, and testing (including verification, validation and
clinical trials) require the scrutiny of scientific experts to ensure that design parameters
and performance characteristics do not impose unwarranted risks.
2. Manufacture
Good, functional medical devices are produced when the manufacturing process is
adequately managed. However, poor manufacturing management can produce
inconsistency in the quality of products, such that non-conforming devices can filter through
the production line to the market, even when the original prototype has been well-designed.
This consideration has led to the development of good manufacturing practice (GMP) for
drugs, biological products and medical devices. Now, GMP is more commonly referred to
as “quality systems in manufacturing”, and these are addressed later in this guide.
3. Packaging and labelling
Properly packaged medical devices pose little risk to individuals handling them, even if
the medical device is biohazardous. This highlights the importance of well-designed
packaging systems in delivering clean, sterile and protected medical devices to the point
of use. Shipping is one of the hazards a medical device and its packaging must survive.
Subtle damage can result during transportation and handling unless the total packaging
system is designed robustly and can withstand various stresses. Well-sealed packaging is
essential for those medical devices that must be maintained sterile.
4. Advertising
Advertisement has the potential to create expectations and powerfully influence the belief
in a medical device’s capabilities. It is important, therefore, that medical device marketing
and advertising are regulated to prevent misrepresentation of a medical device and its
performance. Misleading or fraudulent advertising of medical devices may increase sales.
However, from the buyer’s perspective, the purchase of an inappropriate medical device is
a waste of money that may deprive the patient of more appropriate treatment and could
lead to patient or user injury.
5. Sale
The sale of medical devices by the vendor is a critical stage that leads to the device being
put into actual use. If the vendor is not subject to regulation, then there is higher risk of
exposing the public to low quality or ineffective devices.
6. Use
Users of medical devices can have a profound effect on their safety and effective
performance. Unfamiliarity with a certain technology or operating procedure, and the
use of products for clinical indications outside the scope of those specified in the labelling,
can cause device failure even in the absence of any inherent design or manufacturing
defects. Within the clinical engineering community it is widely believed that user error
underlies at least half of all medical device-related injuries and deaths.
The re-use of disposable devices contrary to the manufacturers instructions, and without
proper control or precautions for minimizing associated risks, can be dangerous (see
6.3.7).
The lack of, or inappropriate, calibration and maintenance of medical devices can
seriously jeopardize their safety and performance. These issues are often overlooked or
underestimated.
7. Disposal
Disposal of certain types of devices should follow specific and stringent safety rules. For
example, devices that are contaminated after use (e.g. syringes) or devices that contain
toxic chemicals, can present hazards to people or the environment and must be disposed
of properly.
It is people who manage each phase in the life span of a medical device, and these
people should be identified and called on to participate in ensuring medical device safety.


2.4 Participants in ensuring the safety of medical devices
As shown in Figure 2, the manufacturer usually manages the first three phases of the
medical device’s life span. The term Vendor includes importers, distributors, retailers and
manufacturers who sell medical equipment. The User is usually a professional in a health
care facility, but may also be the patients.
In addition to these three categories of person who are directly involved with the different
phases of medical devices, the Public/Patient and the Government are also key interested
parties. The public are the ultimate beneficiary of medical devices, and in the case of overthe-counter (home-use) devices, they are the user as well. The government has the
responsibility of overseeing that medical devices sold in the country are safe and effective.


Together, the Manufacturer, Vendor, User, Public and Government are the stakeholders.
All five play critical roles in ensuring the safety of medical devices.
The most important factor that ensures the cooperation of all these stakeholders is an
informed and common understanding of the issues. Shared understanding and responsibility
are achieved through communication and mutual education, which can be effectively
achieved by having all stakeholders participate in establishing the process that ensures
safety and performance of medical devices.


2.5 The role of each participant/stakeholder
The manufacturer, as the creator of the device, must ensure that it is manufactured to
meet or exceed the required standards of safety and performance. This includes the three
phases (design/development/testing, manufacturing, packaging and labelling) that lead to
a product being ready for the market.
The term “user error” is defined as an act that has a different result than that intended
by the manufacturer or expected by the operator. User error may result from a mismatch
between variables, for example the operator, device, task, or environment. By incorporating
human factor engineering principles in design, and appropriate training for users, the risk
of user errors can be minimized.
The vendor provides the interface between the product and the user. He/she should ensure
that the products sold comply with regulatory requirements. With increasing public interest
in health and a competitive marketplace, vendors should be careful to avoid making
misleading or fraudulent claims about their products or issuing false compliance certificates.
In addition, used or refurbished devices should be clearly labelled as such.
Vendors should provide after-sale service. Medical devices often require specialized
training from the manufacturer for proper use and service; therefore, the vendor should
make training a condition to the manufacturer or importer in accepting to sell the device.
In turn, vendors should take responsibility in supporting or training their customers.
Participating in post-market surveillance (receiving and reporting customer complaints/
incidents) is critical for ensuring medical device safety and performance. The vendor must
fulfil these obligations specified by the regulatory authority. For example, the vendor
must make arrangements for processing complaint/incident reports relating to medical
device safety and performance.
In the case of home-use medical devices, the vendor should recognize that the device
being sold might end up in the hands of a layperson who may need special instructions
for the proper use and maintenance of the device. In this situation, efforts must be made
to provide non-technical instructions and to educate and help the customer.
The user should make sure that he/she has qualifications and training in the proper use of
the device, and is familiar with the indications, contra-indications and operating procedures
recommended by the manufacturer. It is crucial that experience gained with medical devices
be shared with other users, the vendor and manufacturer to prevent future problems.
This can be done by reporting any incidents to a coordinating centre from which warnings
can be issued.


CHAPTER 2. MEDICAL DEVICE SAFETYWhen using medical devices, users should always bear in mind that the safety and
health of the patients are in their hands. The user has the responsibility to employ the
medical device only for the intended indications (or to assure that any non-indicated use
of the medical device does not compromise the safety of the patient and other users). The
user also has the responsibility to ensure proper maintenance of medical devices during
active use and safe disposal of obsolete medical devices.
The public are the ultimate beneficiary of medical devices. They should be fully aware
that all devices carry a certain risk and that they can help to promote safety and performance
through self education and by putting “customer pressure” (see section 6.4) on
manufacturers to comply with standards.
Medical devices are increasingly available for home use, making the Public the direct
user. Purchasers of home-use medical devices should be aware of associated risks and
take the responsibility to become educated in the functions and correct operating procedures
for those devices.
The government has the responsibility to oversee the efforts of manufacturers and vendors
and ensure that medical devices sold or made available in the country are safe and effective.
It should provide leadership in creating healthy cooperation among stakeholders in
establishing policies and regulations that are fair and clear to all. Policies and regulations
should be reviewed periodically to respond to changes in technologies by incorporating
appropriate amendments.


2.6 Shared responsibility for medical device safety and performance
In conclusion, the ideal conditions that will ensure the safety and performance of medical
devices require shared responsibility by all stakeholders. This need for cooperation is
illustrated below.
The circle formed by the stakeholders illustrates the shared responsibility. The diamond
handshake symbolizes cooperation and two-way communication (2-way arrow), and the
star highlights how the fundamental elements for cooperation function best when all
stakeholders communicate with each other.
Figure 3. Ideal conditions for ensuring the safety and performance of medical devices

CHAPTER 3
Governmental regulation
of medical devices
The previous section has demonstrated that medical device safety requires that all
stakeholders co-operate and share responsibilities. The roles of each party have been
described. This section will concentrate on how governments can fulfil part of their duties
through the implementation of regulations.
The common regulatory terms pre-market and post-market are introduced and
illustrated with the device life span diagram. The term placing on-market, although not
an official regulatory term, is introduced here to provide a logical understanding of an
important stage in the regulatory mechanism.
3.1 Critical elements for regulatory attention
The safety and performance of medical devices depend on two critical elements:


Pre-market review contributes to product control, and post-market surveillance ensures
that medical devices in use continue to be safe and effective.
There is an important third element, which is the representation of the product to the
user. This is controlled through labelling (during the pre-market stage) and advertising of
the product (see section 6.3.4). Another aspect of product representation, however, is
verbal presentation by the vendor. User/public education is key in guarding against
misrepresentation.

3.2 Stages of regulatory control
We can identify the control of these three critical elements by relating them to the now
familiar Life Span diagram shown below.
Pre-market control is performed on the device to ensure that the product to be placed onmarket complies with regulatory requirements. Labelling and advertising control is
maintained for correct product representation. Placing-on-market control ensures
establishment registration, device listing and after-sale obligations. Post-market
surveillance/vigilance ensures the continued safety and performance of devices in use.


3.3 A common framework for medical device regulations
The items or activities that are most commonly subjected to regulation are show in Table 1.


Items
or activities
regulated
Device attributes
• Safety and performance
Establishment registration
• List products available
or in use
• Requires vendor to fulfil
after-sale obligations
Surveillance/vigilance
• After-sale obligations
• Monitoring of device’s
clinical performance
• Problem identification
and alerts
Manufacturing
• Quality systems (see 3.4.4)
Labelling (representation)
• Accurate description of
product
• Instructions for use
Advertising (representation)
• Prohibits misleading or
fraudulent advertisement

3.4 Regulatory tools and general requirements
The requirements for the three stages of regulatory control of the five founding members
of the GHTF are summarized below. Note that although the different governing bodies
use different terms, their functions are actually quite similar.


3.4.1 Product control
Although different authorities have different systems of pre-market review, they all apply
the risk management philosophy. All medical devices must satisfy safety and performance,
quality system (some low-risk devices may be exempt) and labelling requirements. However,
the degree of regulatory scrutiny increases with the potential risks of the medical device,
as evidenced by the risk-based device classification system (SG1-N015R14) proposed by
the GHTF.
Authorities acknowledge product clearance for the market in various ways. In Australia,
the Therapeutic Goods Administration issues an ARTG (Australian Register of Therapeutic
Goods) number to devices cleared for the market. In Canada, a Device Licence is awarded
by the Therapeutic Products Directorate. In the European Union, after receiving the EC
certificate from a notified body, the manufacturer places the CE mark on or with the
device. In Japan, a Shounin is issued by the Pharmaceutical and Medical Safety Bureau of
the Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare. In the United States, the manufacturer of the
device receives a Marketing Clearance (510K) or an Approval Letter (PMA) from the
FDA.


CHAPTER 3. GOVERNMENTAL REGULATION OF MEDICAL DEVICESIn Canada, devices of classes III and IV are subject to in-depth regulatory scrutiny,
while class II devices require only the manufacturer’s declaration of device safety and
effectiveness before sale. Class I devices are exempted from pre-market submission, but
they must still satisfy the safety, effectiveness and labelling requirements.
In the European system, manufacturers of devices of classes II and III, as well as devices
of class I with either measuring function or sterility requirements, must submit to the
regulator (competent authority): (1) a Declaration of Conformity to the appropriate EC
Directives, and (2) details of the conformity assessment procedure followed. In addition,
for higher risk class devices that require design examination or type examination, the
corresponding EC-Certificates issued by a notified body must also be submitted to the
competent authority. Other medical devices of class I are exempt from pre-market
submissions, although they must follow the essential principles of safety and performance
in their design, construction and labelling requirements.
In Australia, all “registrable” devices must undergo rigorous pre-market evaluation
before market entry. “Listable” devices are less rigorously regulated, but may be evaluated
for safety (not efficacy) if there are regulatory concerns about the risk profile of the product.
Devices manufactured for a particular person, or those built within a health facility and
not commercially supplied, are exempt from the requirement to be registered or listed.
Under some circumstances, the manufacturing facilities may need to be licensed.
In Japan, class I devices are granted Todokede by the regional authorities. Some class II
low-risk devices are granted Todokede if their safety and effectiveness have been established
previously. All devices above class II must obtain a central government licence for market
entry. The Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare is working on the Pharmaceutical
Administration Law (PAL) revision towards risk-based medical device regulation, in line
with the GHTF principles. The new PAL revision should become effective in 2005.
In the United States, most Class III and new devices that are not substantially equivalent
to a legally marketed product that does not require a Pre-Market Approval application,
require clearance through the PMA or Product Development Protocol processes. Most
class II and some class I devices require pre-market entry notification (termed 510k, an
information package for the FDA, which is subject to less stringent review than the PMA
process. The 510k submission must demonstrate how the proposed medical device is
substantially equivalent to a medical device that is already on the US market. Most class
I and some class II (low-risk) devices are exempt from 510k submission before sale, but
are still subject to general control requirements.)


3.4.2 Vendor establishment control
Vendor information facilitates governments in tracking medical device vendors. In
Australia, the sponsor must hold an Enterprise Identification Number before being
permitted to apply to register or list products. Similarly, in Canada, any individual or
company wishing to sell medical devices must apply for permission to obtain an
establishment licence. The European Union requires that a responsible person of the vendor
establishment with a physical address in Europe be registered. In Japan, medical device
sales organizations must have a licence called “Hanbai-Gyoo” or “Hanbai Todoke”. In
addition, importers are required to have a licence called “Yunyu Hanbai-Gyo”. In the
United States, the establishment (manufacturers, initial importer, specifications developer,
contract sterilizer, re-packager and/or re-labeller) must be registered with the FDA.
With all five authorities, the licensing or registration process also imposes obligations
on the vendor for post-market surveillance and/or duties.


MEDICAL DEVICE REGULATIONS
3.4.3 Post-market surveillance/vigilance
It is critically important that the safety and performance of medical devices are continually
assessed when they are in use, as these characteristics can only be proven if one measures
how a device stands up in these conditions. No amount of rigour in the pre-marketing
review process can predict all possible device failures or incidents arising from device
misuse. It is through actual use that unforeseen problems related to safety and performance
can occur.
Different terms in medical device vigilance and post-market surveillance have varying
meanings in different countries. Whilst the GHTF is defining these terms, this document
will use the definitions of the US FDA (see www.fda.gov/cdrh/postsurv/).
Post-market surveillance is a broad term that covers all monitoring activities of medical
devices in use. The two principal activities within surveillance are “post-market surveillance
studies” and “adverse event reporting”.
In post-market surveillance studies, specific and structured data collections are required
of the manufacturer in one of two situations: (1) as a condition of product approval, or
(2) to re-affirm product safety when post-market adverse event reports suggest that premarket safety claims are inconsistent with actual use and result in unacceptable risk.
Japanese authorities and the FDA actively make use of surveillance data collection to
augment the findings of pre-market trials.
Adverse event reporting requires the registration and investigation of adverse events
relating to the use of a device, and the authority necessary to oblige the manufacturer to
recall or modify a defective device. All founding members of the GHTF have mandatory
requirements for vendors or manufacturers to report all device-related events that have
resulted, or could result, in serious injury or death. In some countries, mandatory adverse
event reporting is also extended to users.
Post-market surveillance is interrelated to the quality system requirements described in
the following section.


3.4.4 Quality system requirements
A Quality System is defined as the organizational structure, responsibilities, procedures,
processes and resources needed to implement quality management. Quality system
standards are “generic management standards” and are described in section 5.1.
The international quality system standards for medical devices are issued by the
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) (ISO13485:1996 and ISO13488:
1996). ISO13485:1996 includes all the elements of ISO9001:1994 plus a set of minimum
supplementary requirements for medical devices. The relationship between ISO9001:1994
and ISO13485:1996 is described in Annex 3. ISO13488:1996 is the same as ISO13485:
1994, but without the design control requirements. A new standard, ISO13485:200?, is
currently being developed and will become the international reference standard for medical
devices.
Regulations for quality systems may cover the methods, facilities and controls used by
the manufacturer in the design, manufacture, packaging, labelling, storage, installation,
servicing and post-market handling of medical devices. Therefore, quality system
requirements can influence all phases in the medical device life span. Applicable requirements depend upon the risk class of the device and on the regulatory system of the country.
Design control is normally not required for regulatory scrutiny in medium- to low-risk
devices.
When applied to the manufacturing process, quality system requirements impose strict
quality assurance on every aspect of production. The result is a tightly controlled
manufacturing system, commonly known as Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP), which
13
CHAPTER 3. GOVERNMENTAL REGULATION OF MEDICAL DEVICES

reduces the likelihood of non-conforming products. This practice ensures consistency in
the quality and provides the basis for greater reliability in device safety and performance.
Elements of the quality system are periodically subject to audits, management review, and
corrective or preventive actions that will maintain product quality. Continuous monitoring
and corrective action requirements are interrelated to post-market surveillance previously
described.
The key advantage regarding quality systems is that they represent a preventive approach
to assuring medical device quality versus the previous reactive approach by inspection
and rejection at the end of the manufacturing line. Prevention has been proven to be more
efficient and cost effective in controlling manufacturing processes and maintaining medical
device quality.
It is important to note that since the majority of medical devices are in the medium- to
low-risk classes, their compliance with regulations often depends upon the declarations
of manufacturers, thus the question of quality assurance naturally arises. This is why it is
critical for manufacturers to conform with quality system standards and for this conformity
to be subject to periodic audit by governmental or third party agencies.
All founding members of the GHTF have quality system requirements for their
manufacturers, who are subject to periodic inspection by the government and/or accredited
third party agencies. The applicable standard is determined by the risk class of the device
and depends upon the regulatory system of the country or region.


With the rapid growth in the global market for medical devices, there is a need to
harmonize national standards in order to minimize regulatory barriers and to facilitate
trade. Harmonization also reduces the cost of local industry and government regulations.
The next chapter summarizes the work of the Global Harmonization Task Force to
find common elements and ways to unify the different national standards and regulatory
practices.


MEDICAL DEVICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 4

Global Harmonization Task Force
(GHTF)

4.1 Objectives
Medical devices, like drugs, are used worldwide. With the rapid growth in the global
market for medical devices, there is a need to harmonize national standards in order to
minimize regulatory barriers, facilitate trade and improve access to new technologies.
Harmonization also reduces the cost of implementing regulations for governments and
local industry. The Global Harmonization Task Force (GHTF) was founded in 1993 by
the governments and industry representatives of Australia, Canada, Japan, the European
Union, and the United States of America to address these issues.
The purpose of the GHTF is to encourage a convergence in standards and regulatory
practices related to the safety, performance and quality of medical devices. The GHTF
also promotes technological innovation and facilitates international trade. The primary
means by which its goals are accomplished is via the publication and dissemination of
harmonized guidance documents for basic regulatory practices. These documents, which
are developed by four different GHTF Study Groups, can then be adopted/implemented
by member national regulatory authorities or others. Technical committee members include
representatives from national medical device regulatory authorities and the regulated
industry.


4.2 Scope of the four GHTF study groups
Study Group 1: is charged with comparing operational medical device regulatory systems
around the world and from that comparison, isolating the elements/principles that are
suitable for harmonization and those that may present obstacles to uniform regulations.
In addition, the group is also responsible for developing a standardized format for premarket submissions and harmonized product labelling requirements.
Study Group 2: examines the requirements for:
1. the reporting of adverse events involving medical devices,
2. post-market surveillance and other forms of vigilance
In addition, it is responsible for recommending ways of harmonizing the requirements,
and for providing a discussion forum for harmonization initiatives.
Study Group 3: is responsible for examining existing quality system requirements in countries
that already have well-developed device regulatory systems and identifying areas suitable
for harmonization.
Study Group 4: is charged with the task of examining quality system auditing practices
(initially among the founding members of the GHTF) and developing guidance documents
that lay out harmonized principles for medical device auditing.
It may be helpful to relate the roles of these four groups to the medical device life span.


(For simplification, the solid line arrows indicate the primary focuses of work, although each group has a
continuum of influence throughout all phases.)


With the exception of commercial activities including advertising and sales, which give
freedom to local variations, the GHTF Study Groups are involved in all aspects that have
direct impact on the safety and performance of medical devices. Therefore,
recommendations from the GHTF Task Forces can provide excellent reference or guidance
for countries that are establishing medical devices regulation programmes.


4.3 Benefits of the GHTF
1. By following recommendations from the GHTF, countries can ensure that their
regulatory controls are not in significant conflict with global harmonization
recommendations. The GHTF is directing and converging the harmonized guidance
documents.
2. Critical issues such as safety and performance requirements, quality systems, standards
and procedures of post-market surveillance are studied in-depth by experts from different
countries to reach consensual recommendations and these are incorporated into the
GHTF final guidance documents.
3. Global harmonization and cooperation in post-market surveillance will facilitate an
international devices data bank that allows rapid, global access to device information,
alerts or recalls. This will promote the safety and effectiveness of medical devices.
4. Where a country’s programme is harmonized with the programmes of other countries,
regulatory burdens and costs for local government and industry will be significantly
reduced, while regulatory cooperation, commerce and international trade will be
enhanced.
5. Other emerging issues of international significance can be put to the GHTF for a common
solution.
6. GHTF provides an opportunity for countries to participate and observe regulatory
developments that they could adopt. The current trend towards a regional harmonization
will be useful for countries and can be supported by WHO’s parallel regional structure.
For example, at the 1998 GHTF Meeting in Australia, the Asian Harmonisation Working
Party (AHWP) held its first formal meeting and at the 1999 GHTF meeting in the
United States, medical device regulators of the Americas launched a regional GHTF
group.


MEDICAL DEVICE REGULATIONS
4.4 Final documents from the GHTF
As at June 2003, 19 final guidance documents supported by consensus of the regulators
and industry representatives of the GHTF founding members have been published. These
are listed in Annex 2 with an indication of how they relate to the common framework
developed in this Guide. Each document is identified by study group (SG) and document
numbers.
Details of other recommendations under development by GHTF Study Groups may
also be found at www.ghtf.org.

4.5 Global Medical Device Nomenclature (GMDN)
Achieving consistency in nomenclature is fundamental to the overall goal of international
harmonization, particularly for the identification of devices involved in adverse incident
reports.
In 1993, the European Commission mandated the ‘Comité Européen de Normalisation’
(CEN) to produce a standard indicating the structure of a nomenclature system that could
meet the needs of the global market. The International Standards Organization was invited
to participate to ensure that international considerations were addressed. The resulting
standard was adopted as ‘EN/ISO 15225 Nomenclature – Specification for a nomenclature
system for medical devices for the purposes of regulatory data exchange’.
Before the creation of the Global Medical Device Nomenclature (GMDN) in 1997, a
multitude of nomenclatures were being used, including the Universal Medical Device
Nomenclature System. With the introduction of the European Directives for medical device
regulations, the need for a standardized international nomenclature became clear. WHO
supports wide consultation to adopt a single, harmonized option.
The GMDN, endorsed by the GHTF as the global nomenclature to be used by regulators
for the classification and registration of medical devices, is intended:
1. to give a common generic description for every general term that describes characteristics
of a medical device. This is to be used for identifying similar devices to those involved
in an adverse incident report;
2. to identify a device, using the generic term, for having been awarded a specific design
or other certificate;
3. to serve as a basis for E-commerce – to provide a generic basis for purchasing individual
types of manufactured devices, by establishing a heading for comparison of products
from different manufacturers.
Further information on the GMDN can be found at http://www.gmdn.info/


CHAPTER 4. GLOBAL HARMONIZATION TASK FORCE (GHTF)

The understanding of standards systems, the standards development process and their
use in conformity assessment has become essential in establishing medical device
regulations. In this chapter, a general introduction to standards will be provided. This is
followed by a description of current trends in the use of voluntary standards in medical
device regulations and related recommendations of the GHTF.


5.1 What are standards?
The formal definition of a standard that should be adopted in the medical device domain
is given by the ISO:
Standards are documented agreements containing technical specifications or other precise
criteria to be used consistently as rules, guidelines or definitions of characteristics, to
ensure that materials, products, process and services are fit for their purpose.


Types of specifications in standards
Standards can establish a wide range of specifications for products, processes and services
(see www.iso.org for definitions).
1. Prescriptive specifications obligate product characteristics, e.g. device dimensions,
biomaterials, test or calibration procedures, as well as definitions of terms and
terminologies.
2. Design specifications set out the specific design or technical characteristics of a product,
e.g. operating room facilities or medical gas systems.
3. Performance specifications ensure that a product meets a prescribed test, e.g. strength
requirements, measurement accuracy, battery capacity, or maximum defibrillator energy.
4. Management specifications set out requirements for the processes and procedures
companies put in place, e.g. quality systems for manufacturing or environmental
management systems.
A standard may contain a combination of specifications. Prescriptive, design and
performance specifications have been commonplace in standards. Management
specifications are also rapidly gaining prominence.
Recent years have seen the development and application of what are known as “generic
management system standards”, where “generic” means that the standards’ requirements
can be applied to any organization, regardless of the product it makes or the service it
delivers, and “management system” refers to what the organization does to manage its
processes. Two of the most widely known series of generic management system standards
are the ISO 9000 series for managing quality systems, and the ISO 14000 series for
environmental management systems. Wide ranging information and assistance related to
these standards and their application is available at www.iso.org. ISO13485 and ISO13488are specific ISO quality systems standards for medical device manufacturing.
Terms such as outcome-oriented standards, objectives standards, function-focused
standards and result-oriented standards are also employed. Essentially, these terms indicate
that the standards specify the objectives (ends) to be achieved while leaving the methods
(means) to the implementers. This can minimize possible constrictive effects of standards.


5.2 Why do we need standards?
Standards can serve different purposes. They can:
1. Provide reference criteria that a product, process or service must meet.
2. Provide information that enhances safety, reliability and performance of products,
processes and services.
3. Assure consumers about reliability or other characteristics of goods or services provided
in the marketplace.
4. Give consumers more choice by allowing one firm’s products to be substituted for, or
combined with, those of another.
Although we take for granted the advantage of being able to order shoes or clothes
simply by referring to a size, this is only possible because manufacturers follow some
industrial standards in making shoes and clothes.
In contrast, incompatibility between electrical plugs and receptacles is a prime example
of different countries failing to follow the same standards. When North Americans want
to use a portable computer or other electrical appliance in Europe or Asia, they can be
frustrated to find that the plug and voltage are not compatible.
With the world becoming a global village, the need and benefits of standardization are
becoming more and more important internationally for manufacturing, trade and
communications. Quality systems and other management standards can provide common
references to the kind of process, service or management practice expected. The Internet
functions effectively because globally agreed-upon interconnection protocols exist. Global
communication would be very difficult without international standardization.
Health care workers are well aware of incompatible consumables or replacement parts
in medical devices of similar function that are made by different manufacturers (e.g. IV
set, X-ray cassettes). The lack of available consumables and repair parts is an important
cause of medical equipment problems that are constantly encountered in developing
countries.
Most medical devices are used globally. The safety, performance and consistent quality
of medical devices is, therefore, an international public health interest. Thus, global
harmonization of medical device standards and regulations is critical. In section 5.8, we
shall further describe the need to use voluntary standards to provide detailed information
in meeting regulatory requirements.


5.3 Voluntary and mandatory standards
Most standards are voluntary. However, a standard may be mandated by a company, professional society, industry, government or trade agreement. A standard may be called a regulation
when it becomes mandatory. This mandate may, or may not, have a legal basis.
When a standard is mandated by a government or an international trade agreement, it
normally becomes legally obligatory based on regulations or a law established by the
government or the contracts between international bodies. Countries that are considering
making standards mandatory should take into account the potential consequences under
international agreements on technical barriers to trade.


Standards development process

Figure 8 provides an example of the many steps
used by standards development organizations (see
www.iso.org for ISO’s six-step process in the
development of international standards). In
general, good standards have the following
attributes:
1. Their development has been overseen by a
recognized body, thus ensuring that the process
is transparent and not dominated by vested
interests.
2. The development process has been open to
input from all interested parties and the
resulting document based on consensus.
Consensus, in a practical sense, means that
significant agreement among the stakeholders
is reached in the preparation of the standard,
including steps taken to resolve all objections.
This process implies more than the votes of a
majority, but not necessarily unanimity.
3. Good technical standards are based on
consolidated results of science, technology and
experience, and are aimed at the promotion of
optimum community benefits.
4. Standards do not hinder innovations and must
be periodically reviewed to remain in tune with
technological advances.
5.5 Conformity assessment with standards
There are four common industrial methods for assessing conformity to a standard.
1. A product’s conformity to standards is commonly assessed by direct testing.
2. A process can be assessed by audit. Certification organizations or regulatory authorities
attest that products or processes conform to a standard by authorizing the display of
their certification mark.
3. The conformity to management standard by an organization is known as management
systems registration, a relatively new term used primarily in North America. Formally
established audit procedures are followed by certified auditors who are supported by
technical experts of the domain under audit. Management System Registration bodies
(Registrars) issue registration certificates to companies that meet a management standard
such as ISO9000, or to medical device manufacturers that meet the ISO13485/ISO9001
standards.
Note that in North America, the term “registration” is used for an organization while
“certification” is reserved for products. Many other countries use “certification” for
both a product and an organization.
4. Accreditation is used by an authoritative body to give formal recognition that an
organization or a person is competent to carry out a specific task. For example, inEurope, Notified Bodies are notified or accredited by the relevant State Competent
Authority to carry out conformity assessment of medical devices. In Canada, a Quality
System Registrar needs an accreditation from Health Canada before that Registrar
begins assessing medical device manufacturers for conformity with quality system
standards. The International Laboratory Accreditation Cooperation (ILAC) uses
accreditation to provide formal recognition to competent laboratories around the world.


5.6 National and international standards systems
A country may have many voluntary standards bodies. However, normally there is one
official national organization that coordinates and accredits the standards development
bodies in the country. This official national organization would have the authority to
endorse a document as a national standard in accordance with official criteria, and it also
represents the country in the various international standards organizations. In the United
States, the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), a private, non-profit organization, 
is an official national organization. In Canada, it is the Standards Council of
Canada (SCC), a crown (government) corporation. In Europe there is a committee composed of CEN
(Comité Européen de Normalisation), CENELEC (the European Committee
for Electrotechnical Standardization) and ETSI (the European Telecommunication
Standards Institute) that supercedes the various European national standards bodies that
were in place previously.
For developing countries, reference to a standards system not only helps medical device
administration, it is also important for other industrial and economic developments.
International development agencies increasingly realize that a standardized infrastructure
is a basic requirement for the success of economic policies that will improve productivity,
market competitiveness and export capability.
The three major international standardization organizations are the International
Organization for Standardization (ISO), the International Electrotechnical Commission
(IEC), and the International Telecommunication Union (ITU). Generally, ITU covers
telecommunications, IEC covers electrical and electronic engineering, and ISO covers the
remainder. For information technology, risk management, quality systems and many other
areas, joint ISO/IEC technical committees manage standardization.
Other organizations also produce documents on international standardization. Their
documents are usually adopted by ISO/IEC/ITU as international standards if they have
been developed in accordance with international consensus criteria. Any grouping of five
member countries can also propose a standard to be considered by ISO for adoption as
an international standard.
Useful web sites include: www.iso.ch, www.IEC.ch, and www.itu.int/ for the ISO, IEC
and ITU respectively. From here, links to national or regional standard organizations are
indicated.


5.7 Identification of standards
Standards are generally designated by an alphabetical prefix and a number. The letters
(e.g. ISO, IEC, ANSI, CAN, EN, DIN) indicate the body that has approved them, while
the numbers identify the specific standard and the year in which it was finalized. The
standard reference code often gives an indication of adoption where standards are
equivalent. For example:
1. CAN/CSA-Z386-94 means a standard developed in 1994 by the Canadian Standards
Association (CSA, one of four accredited Canadian standards development
organizations) and designated by the Standards Council of Canada (SCC) as a Canadian
national standard.


CHAPTER 5. STANDARDS
2. ANSI/AAMI/ISO 15223:2000 means the international standard ISO 15223 (established
in 2000) adopted by the Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentations
in the United States, which in turn is designated by the American National Standards
Institute (ANSI) as an American national standard.
3. UNI EN ISO 9001 indicates an Italian national standard (UNI) which is an adoption
of a European standard (EN), which is itself an adoption of the International Standard
ISO9001.


5.8 Current trends in the use of standards in medical device regulations
Although a standard can be set and mandated by an authority, the current trend is for the
adoption of voluntary standards established by consensus from all interested parties (the
stakeholders). The use of voluntary standards originated from the realization that while
regulations generally address the essential safety and performance principles, manufacturers
and users still need to know detailed specifications pertaining to specific products. The
provision of such specifications and detailed requirements for the multitude of devices
presents an enormous task for regulatory authorities. Fortunately, the wealth of voluntary
standards already existing or being developed provide such precise specifications. The
use of voluntary/consensus standards has many advantages including the following:
1. They are normally developed by experts with access to the vast resources available in
the professional and industrial communities.
2. By taking advantage of such existing resources, the government can overcome its own
limited resources for providing product specific technical requirements and
characteristics.
3. Conformity to standards can also be assessed by an accredited third party (such as a
notified body in Europe), which is a well-established industrial practice around the
world.
4. The use of international standards facilitates harmonized regulatory processes and world
trade, and thus improves global access to new technology.
5. As technology advances, it is much easier to update standards than to change regulations.
Timely development and periodic revision by expert groups make medical device
standards effective and efficient tools for supporting health care.
6. Manufacturers have the flexibility to choose appropriate standards or other means to
demonstrate compliance with regulatory requirements.
Regulatory authorities can recognize a standard, fully or partially, provided they clearly
specify and publicize their intent. Several standards can also be recognized as a group to
satisfy the requirements for a particular device. In some countries, the publication of
government-recognized standards mandates product compliance.
Medical devices intended for global use should follow international standards. For
example, the ISO Technical Report (ISO 16142:2000) lists a number of significant
international standards that may be suitable for demonstrating compliance with certain
features of the essential principles of safety and performance of medical devices.
The GHTF has issued the following recommendations regarding the recognition and
use of standards:
International standards are a building block for harmonized regulatory processes to
assure the safety, quality and performance of medical devices. To achieve this purpose,
the following principles are recommended:• Regulatory Authorities and industry should encourage and support the development
of international standards for medical devices to demonstrate compliance with “the
Essential Principles of Safety and Performance of Medical Devices” (GHTF document
SG1 NO20R5 referred to hereafter as the Essential Principles).
• Regulatory Authorities developing new medical device regulations should encourage
the use of international standards.
• Regulatory Authorities should provide a mechanism for recognizing international
standards to provide manufacturers with a method of demonstrating compliance
with the Essential Principles.
• When an international standard is not applied or not applied in full, this is acceptable
if an appropriate level of compliance with the Essential Principles can be
demonstrated.
• While it may be preferable for harmonization purposes to use international standards,
it may be appropriate for Regulatory Authorities to accept the use of national/regional
standards or industry standards as a means of demonstrating compliance.
• Standards Bodies developing or revising standards for use with medical devices should
consider the suitability of such standards for demonstrating compliance with the
Essential Principles and to identify which of the Essential Principles they satisfy.
• The use of standards should preferably reflect current, broadly applicable technology
while not discouraging the use of new technologies.
• Standards may represent the current state of the art in a technological field. However,
not all devices, or elements of device safety and/or performance may be addressed
by recognized standards, especially for new types of devices and emerging
technologies.

CHAPTER 6

Optimizing the use of
regulatory resources

Implementing a full regulatory programme can be very expensive and demanding on
resources. The work of the GHTF and the trend to use international standards are, in
effect, tackling this problem by steering manufacturers more and more toward producing
medical devices with uniform standards. The methods and procedures relating to
governmental regulations are also converging. These developments create opportunities
for countries to establish low-cost programmes that promote the safety and performance
of medical devices by taking full advantage of what others have already done in this field.
Local adoption of harmonized recommendations will facilitate international exports of
medical devices manufactured locally.
A good approach to setting a clear direction for all stakeholders is to establish a
comprehensive national policy or guideline on medical device management. The
government can subsequently bring in legislation and enforcement to suit the country’s
conditions and needs. Five principal activities are identified:
1. Increasing the knowledge of the medical device sector
2. Establishing basic regulatory programmes
3. Drafting a comprehensive policy/guideline including the recognition and use of standards
4. Promoting compliance and cooperation
5. Setting priorities for regulatory programme development


6.1 Increasing knowledge of the medical device sector
Several key activities are suggested:
1. Access the Internet for a great deal of freely available, relevant information. A list of
web site addresses is provided in Annex 1.
2. Participate actively in the projects of the GHTF Task Forces in order to benefit from
the experience of experts from other countries.
3. Form a partnership with a country that is a member of the GHTF and has a functioning
regulatory programme on medical devices.
4. Make connections with national and international medical device problem coordinating
centres.
5. Become an active member of a regional harmonization organization (e.g. Asian
Harmonization Working Party (AHWP); the Latin American and Caribbean regional
group (contact the GHTF for information on regional groups).

6.2 Establishing basic regulatory programmes
As discussed previously, medical device safety and performance is multi-phased and requires
cooperation among all stakeholders. It is essential to identify the stakeholders in each
country by maintaining a list of manufacturers, importers, distributors, retailers,
institutional users (both public and private health care facilities), lay users (estimated
from the number of home-use medical device vendors), and concerned citizens groups.
A basic regulatory programme should also include other important activities: holding
education/consultation sessions with the stakeholders to discuss the issues; creating an
atmosphere conducive to mutual trust and open discussions; and, inviting input from the
stakeholders. The government should not overlook the willingness of stakeholders to
help suggest solutions for issues that affect them. Such sessions will help to share
understanding of issues affecting the safety and performance of medical devices, and should
lead to the development of a policy/guideline that sets a direction for everyone (see Section
6.3). Apart from the rich source of practical suggestions that stakeholders can offer, they
are more likely to comply with any requirements that they have participated in devising.
If there are significant numbers of medical devices being sold or used in the country,
then two basic programmes should be set up as soon as is possible: (1) Basic legislation;
(2) Problem sharing.


6.2.1 Basic legislation
If the government has not already passed legislation, this should be done:
a. To prohibit misleading or fraudulent advertising of medical devices,
Advertising has a powerful influence on people. A prohibition on the misleading or
fraudulent advertisement of health devices should be an essential legislation. This is
particularly important since, as people are becoming more health conscious, the
development of home-use medical devices is rapidly expanding.
Advertising control does not have to place demands on resources. For example, in
Canada, even though the prohibition of misleading or fraudulent advertising is legislated,
the Government does not routinely screen device advertising. The Government, however,
will respond to inquiries or complaints made by the public or health care professionals.
If the advertiser cannot convincingly prove their claims, the government can take action
to prohibit the advertisement.
b. To empower the government to stop the sale of a device and issue alerts to the public
under urgent hazardous conditions. Again, this is essential legislation in case the
manufacturer or the vendor has not taken adequate action to ensure the safety of their
product.


6.2.2 Sharing problem reports
The government should establish a national coordinating agency to receive and manage
problem reports from all sources. This information can then be shared with other users in
the country and in other countries as well. The objective is to improve the protection of
the health and safety of patients, users and others by disseminating information, which
can prevent repetition of adverse events.
If the government has no funding to set up such an agency, it should encourage the
users, hospital technicians, clinical engineers and vendors to form a network. There is a
high possibility that they will support such a programme, since it is in their own selfinterest. Hospitals and universities are likely to have the resources and willingness to


CHAPTER 6. OPTIMIZING THE USE OF REGULATORY RESOURCES
coordinate such activities. An advisory panel of experts and/or scientific testing laboratories
in these institutions would be very useful for investigating problems. For example, they
could confirm bacterial contamination, or investigate possible electrical hazards.


6.3 Drafting a comprehensive policy or guideline on
medical device management
Going through the exercise of drafting a policy or guideline will clarify, for both the
government and the other stakeholders, what the issues are and how to address them.
The resulting policy/guideline will also set a direction for how to manage potential
problems. Moreover, it will provide a foundation for shared understanding and shared
responsibility of all the concerned parties (see section 2.6). After a policy or guideline on
medical device management is established, its implementation and integration into national
legislation will depend on national context and resources available.


6.3.1 Advantages of a national policy
Effective national policies have a legislative base. Although this is regrettably not always
the case, they still serve as a framework of rules for decision-making and guidance. In
some countries, a national policy may automatically have legal recognition. Some of the
advantages of a national policy are as follows:
1. it obligates an examination of the country-wide conditions for holistic planning;
2. it is written in non-legal terms, hence is easier for lay people to understand;
3. it can provide more explanatory information than a regulatory document;
4. a guideline can be written as a policy supplement to include more detailed information
on means and procedures to achieve policy objectives;
5. policies and guidelines do not require a legal and lengthy process to modify them.
The policy on medical device management can also include instructions for the role of
each stakeholder (see section 2.5). For example, the role of the user can be expanded to
include issues such as the care and maintenance of devices, introducing an integrated
approach to medical device management.
Depending on the culture and legal system, a country may find it more effective to
legislate all key requirements of the policy. Some countries may prefer to legislate the
items gradually as the need is demonstrated and as resources for monitoring and enforcement become available (see section 6.5). Countries that have decided to accept devices
that are approved by other countries can simplify the pre-market control regulations
(section 6.3.3) by including this in their legislation.


6.3.2 Classification of medical devices2
The GHTF document SG1 N015R18 has been drafted to provide a rule-based system in
classifying medical devices (see section 3.4.1). It contains 16 rules and decision trees to
demonstrate how these rules should be used to classify specific devices. The document
will be of value to countries developing or amending regulations.
Regulatory authorities that are developing new classification schemes or amending
existing ones are encouraged to consider the adoption of this system, as this will help to
reduce the diversity of systems worldwide and facilitate the process of harmonization.


See Glossary for a detailed description of the term “medical device” which may be useful in the formulation
of a national policy

MEDICAL DEVICE REGULATIONS
6.3.3 Medical device product control
Pre-market approval is one of the most important aspects of any comprehensive policy.
The difficulty of establishing a local pre-market review team is not just financial but also
depends on whether specialized scientific and clinical expertise is available in the country.
However, with the work of the GHTF and the ability to look at approval decisions in
other countries, it is now feasible for many countries to avoid the expense of a local premarket review team.
Global statistics on medical device manufacturers reveal that the US, Japan and EU
countries manufacture approximately 85% of the medical devices in the world (see Figure 9
below). They already have comprehensive regulatory systems in place that follow the
“Essential Principles of Safety and Performance of Medical Devices” recommended by
the GHTF. This is a positive development for the other countries of the world that import
most of their medical devices.
As an alternative to a local pre-market review team, a Figure 9. Global statistics on medical
government can adopt a policy of accepting devices that are
device production (2002)
manufactured in compliance with the regulations of another
country. The choices include, for example, devices with an
OTHER
17%
Australian, Canadian or Japanese License, devices with a
European “CE” mark, or devices that have been granted
marketing clearance by the US-FDA. In this way the citizens of
JAPAN
14%
the importing country will be assured of the same risk exposure
USA
as the citizens of the exporting countries. Whether to grant local
43%
marketing rights to that device remains a local government
decision, which may rest on local socioeconomic considerations
and technology assessment information.
EU
Since it may be necessary to verify the authenticity of
26%
regulatory compliance, device suppliers can be asked to obtain
an “export certificate”, the nominal cost of which may be passed
on to the importer. However, since export certificates can differ in purpose and format, it
is important to be cautious when relying on them (section 6.6 discusses this issue).
A similar approach can be used for local medical device manufacturers. The government
can require that local manufacturers make submissions for compliance acceptance to a
country that has an accepted pre-market review team. In fact, this is what the manufacturers
have to do anyway if they want to sell internationally. If a country has competent private
organizations, the government has the option to authorize such organizations to perform
the pre-market assessment, as is now carried out by the European Union.
The Quality System certification of local manufacturing facilities is usually delegated
to authorized third party agents (such as the notified bodies in the EU, or Quality Systems
Registrars in Australia and Canada). In the case of the United States, the FDA, following
the completion of an inspection, can issue a letter to the firm denoting their compliance
status. Currently the cost of inspection is borne by the FDA, and is performed, almost
without exception, by FDA employees.
In avoiding the expense and effort of a pre-market review team, a government can
concentrate on implementing vendor and device registration and surveillance programmes
for devices in use.


6.3.4 Product representation control
Product representation is controlled through labelling during the pre-market stage and
advertising of the product during the on-market stage. Labelling requirements include
identification of the device, instructions for use, as well as safety- and performance-related
27
CHAPTER 6. OPTIMIZING THE USE OF REGULATORY RESOURCES

information. A harmonized format for labelling is recommended by the GHTF (SG1
N009R6).
Advertising control is an important tool for ensuring that the public is protected from
misleading and fraudulent claims as described in section 6.2.1.


6.3.5 Vendor establishment control
Vendor establishment control allows the government to be informed of which
establishments are selling what devices. Its main purpose is to establish contact with
vendors in case of adverse events and also to inform the local vendors of their responsibility
for after-sale obligations. In most countries, only one level of in-country vendor is required
to be registered for control. For example, if the importer or the distributor were already
registered, then it would not be necessary to register the retailers of the same device.
There are two general ways to accomplish vendor establishment control: (1) Sales
notification, and (2) establishment license or registration.
Sales notification is generally a less effective method. Vendors are automatically
permitted to sell medical devices provided that they notify the regulatory authority, either
before or after the sale, as required by the authority.
Establishment License or Registration, on the other hand, requires that the vendor
either obtains a license or is registered before they are allowed to sell medical devices.
This method has several advantages.
• It ensures that the government has a record of the vendor.
• It enables the government to place emphasis on after-sale obligations.
• It provides a means for the government to enforce requirements; for example, it will
be able to suspend a license if the vendor does not fulfil after-sale responsibilities.
• It allows the government to require an annual renewal of the license or registration
in order to maintain updated information on the vendors.
Since the latter method places considerable demand on the government, the government
can impose a fee on the licensing or registration process. This fee will help defray the cost
of administration. The fee may also help to strengthen the vendor’s efforts to fulfil their
obligations so that they avoid losing the license that they have paid for.
Experience from Canada reveals that an establishment licence is a more effective means
than sales notification for keeping records of the vendors (see www.hc-sc.gc.ca/hpfb-dgpsa/
tpd-dpt/ for Canadian guidance documents on establishment licensing).


6.3.6 The control of home-use, refurbished, and donated devices
Home-use devices
A recent development in the medical device market is the rapid increase in the number
and variety of home-use medical devices. This results in a shift from institution-based
professional users of medical devices to their employment by lay users. Here, education
of the consumer is key to safety and performance.


Refurbished devices
Formerly, used or refurbished medical devices were traded to developing countries, mainly
by third parties, and the vendors were often opportunistic merchants with no technical
expertise. Many recipient countries had very bad experiences with used equipment because
there were no after-sale technical support or spare parts. By 2002, at least five countries
had imposed a total ban on the import of used equipment and 17 others have partial bans
depending on the type of equipment.

The situation has changed rapidly over the past 10 years due to shrinking health care
budgets and rapid technological innovations. Refurbished medical equipment is increasingly
being used within the United States and other industrialized countries. As larger hospitals
purchase the latest models, they trade in their superseded equipment which is often still in
good condition. This equipment can remain suitable for a wide range of applications,
both for city and rural hospitals, and large global medical device manufacturers are now
participating in the business of refurbishment.
As a result of the increasing use of refurbished equipment in industrialized countries,
the question of regulations is raised. Work is under way to define the scope of refurbished
equipment and the different requirements for their regulation.
Irrespective of developments taking place in the regulation of refurbished equipment,
it is important for developing countries to ensure that companies supplying refurbished
equipment will fulfil after-sale obligations including the continued availability of technical
support and maintenance services.


Donated devices
Donated equipment can be of great value to health facilities with limited resources, but
donations are not always useful, nor totally “free”. At the same time, many developing
countries are increasingly dependent on donor assistance to meet their equipment needs.
Failing international regulations, WHO has produced a set of guidelines to assist
governments and organizations dealing with equipment donation. The four underlying
principles of good donation practice can be summarized as follows:
i)


health care equipment donations should benefit the recipient, and should be based on a
needs assessment and analysis of the environment in which the donations will be placed


ii) donations should be given with due respect for the wishes and authority of the recipient
and according to a pre-agreed plan
iii) there should be no double standard in quality: if an item is unacceptable in the donor
country, it is also unacceptable as a donation
iv) there should be effective communication between the donor and the recipient: all
donations should respond to an expressed need by the recipient and should never
arrive unannounced.


6.3.7 The re-use of medical devices that are labelled “for single use”
Special attention must be exercised in any attempt to re-use devices that are labelled “for
single use”. The following points provide a glimpse of this complex issue.
1. Devices labelled “for single use” are designed with the intention by manufacturers that
they will not be re-used. Therefore:
a. Some devices may not be truly taken apart for proper cleaning.
b. Single use devices may not be re-sterilized properly.
c. The mechanical integrity and/or functionality of some single use devices may not
stand up to rigorous reprocessing.
d. It may never have been determined how cleaning chemicals or sterilizing agents
affect the re-processed devices or the patient.
2. Because of materials used or the design of the device, some models within a particular
type of device may be suitable for safe reprocessing while others may not. There may
not be evidence of how many times a device may be safely reprocessed.


CHAPTER 6. OPTIMIZING THE USE OF REGULATORY RESOURCES
3. Some devices should never be re-used. For example, single use injection syringes because
the risk of infection is very high. Field data from developing countries revealed that the
re-use of injection syringes/needles is a major source of HIV and hepatitis infections.
In considering the reprocessing and the re-use of a device labelled “for single use”, one
should first obtain thorough knowledge of possible hazards and assess the impact on
patients against the potential cost savings. Are there adequate facilities and trained persons
to do the reprocessing? Some possible hazards may not even be foreseen. The ethical
questions and the potential consequences of patient infection must be considered, along
with the question of legal responsibility for reprocessing and re-use of single use devices.
In the United States, FDA subjects the reprocessor of a single use device to the same
regulatory requirements as those for the original manufacturer of the device.
The resources in Annex 1 provide a list of references on home-use, refurbished and
donated devices.


6.3.8 Post-market surveillance
In addition to the basic problem-sharing centre described in section 6.2.2, a complete
programme of post-market surveillance should be described in the policy/guideline. This
programme should include the major components of after-sale obligations for the vendor,
including:
• implant registration: facilitates notifying the patient of pertinent post-implant
information
• distribution record: for complete and rapid removal of devices in case of problems
• recall procedures: in case of device recall, the procedures are in place and can be
implemented
• mandatory reporting: reporting of any adverse events of devices in use
• complaint handling: procedures and records of reported problems relating to safety or
performance
It is important to note the following points:
1. An incident with a medical device is an unusual (or unexpected) event associated with
its use. Not all incidents lead to adverse events, but all incidents should be investigated
to identify product or use problems that can or do result in permanent impairment or
injury to the patient or user. The problems should then be addressed so they will not
recur. Products can contribute to adverse outcomes by their complex nature or labelling,
unique features and functions, or failure to meet manufacturing specifications. Users
can contribute to adverse outcomes by failure to follow labelled instructions or
indications for use, lack of training, misapplication of the product, and failure to provide
routine maintenance on the product. Patients can contribute to adverse outcomes by
not following health care guidelines appropriate to the product, failure to get regular
medical and surgical monitoring and assessments, and failure to report product
problems.
Even the environment can contribute to adverse outcomes: low lighting at night, fewer
health care workers available after regular working hours, no after-hours vendor support
to resolve product questions, etc. All of these factors are important to consider in
determining why an adverse event occurs and how it might be prevented in the future.
Care should be taken not to discourage reporting by assigning culpability. Problem
resolution and prevention remain the ultimate goals and are fundamental in assuring


MEDICAL DEVICE REGULATIONS
safety for all. WHO is committed to patient safety, which is an Organization-wide
initiative supported by World Health Assembly Resolution WHA 55.18.
2. Most of the obligatory surveillance activities rest with the vendor, but the user is the
ultimate monitor of device performance and reporter of problems encountered. The
surveillance programme should be promoted and developed to encourage cooperation
among all stakeholders. Section 6.4 suggests how this can be accomplished.
3. The quality of problem reports improves when users possess some technical knowledge
of the devices. Both clinical engineers and biomedical equipment technicians in health
care facilities can be very helpful in this task. If the problem report is to be added to the
problem databank for trend and other statistical analyses, the report must follow certain
standards for it to be useful. Governments should adopt recommended formats and
procedures (see documents of the GHTF Study Group 2).
4. The chance of discovering device problems increases with the number of devices in use.
Therefore, it is useful to be connected to an international database, which will maximize
the effectiveness of post-market surveillance.
5. Finally, if user errors are frequent, then a user qualification programme that is controlled
through a professional association can be a useful tool that will not make undue demands
on government resources. Similarly, as a proactive measure, this tool can be implemented
for devices of high-risk classes.


6.3.9 Recognition and use of established national or international standards
The use of voluntary standards has been described in the preceding section. This practice
can reduce cost, simplify the regulatory process and promote international harmonization.
A national regulatory agency will need to establish a procedure for official recognition
of voluntary standards. This process of recognition may vary from country to country. If
there is no existing national standards body, an organization may be created/designated
by the competent authority to research and recommend official recognition of standards.
If there is already a national standards body, they can collaborate with the medical device
regulatory authority to agree upon and adopt standards for recognition. In general,
appropriate international standards should receive priority for recognition. The policy of
recognition and the standards that are recognized should be made clear to all stakeholders.
Examples of such policies and lists of recognized standards can be obtained from the
following web-sites:
European Union: www.newapproach.org
United States: www.fda.gov/cdrh/modact/fr0225ap.pdf
Canada: www.hc-sc.gc.ca/hpfb-dgpsa/tpd-dpt


6.4 Promoting compliance and cooperation
Promotional activity is a powerful tool that encourages compliance and reduces the burden
of enforcement. Often, bad practices are the results of not knowing better alternatives. If
the regulatory authority properly disseminates the policy to the stakeholders and it is
understood, it has already made the most important step towards the harmonized
compliance of all the parties concerned. User/public education is crucial for guarding
against misuse and misrepresentation of medical devices.
We should remember that medical device users, the patients and the public, are people
for whom medical devices are designed (the customers). Since they are the people upon
which device safety and performance will directly impact, they can readily become great


CHAPTER 6. OPTIMIZING THE USE OF REGULATORY RESOURCES
allies to the government in applying “customer pressure” for compliance. Governments
should appeal to the customers’ own self-interests to participate in the system.
Manufacturers and vendors, for their part, are currently embarking on customer-focused
missions: they want to provide quality products and quality services to their customers.
This is positive. Governments can capitalize on such developments by encouraging
voluntary cooperation. This will result in a low-cost programme that ensures the safety
and performance of medical devices.
Participation in regional cooperation is recommended as a means for regulator-toregulator interaction facilitating increased learning and sharing of ideas to develop
regulations with the minimum cost and maximized benefit. WHO’s regional and country
infrastructure puts it in a good position to support such exchanges.


6.5 Setting priorities for regulatory programme development
Regulatory programmes for medical devices can be developed in stages according to a
country’s needs as they are stated in the national policy and identified in consultation
with all stakeholders. In countries where resources are limited, this guide recommends
the initial implementation of the basic programmes that are described in section 6.2. As
more resources become available, programme expansion can follow the ladder suggested
in Figure 10. In follow-up to this Global Overview of Medical Device Regulations, there
is a need to provide countries with a model programme on which they can establish their
own, appropriate regulatory system, based on international experience.


The means to determine device acceptance criteria are described in section 6.3.3.
Preventing sub-standard devices from appearing in the market place should be the first
priority for every government. For most countries, this will mean an effective import
control that will ensure that the acceptance criteria specified in the policy are strictly
enforced. It is critical that medical device regulatory authorities cooperate closely with
the customs department so that the customs process is efficient enough to prevent
unnecessary holding of acceptable goods needed for health care. Here, customs enforcement
officers need a clear policy, and sufficient education and training. They should be well
informed of the medical device acceptance criteria.

High priority should be given to establishment registration, device listing and the
adoption of a medical device nomenclature system. This will enable the government to
monitor the kind of devices that are used or that are available on the local market. In case
of a medical device alert or recall, it is essential to know where all similar devices are in
use. The distribution records are the key to this identification. It is the vendor’s responsibility
to keep distribution records, and it should be a government priority to register the vendor
establishments and the medical devices they sell. The government can also make use of
the advantages described in section 6.3.5 to make this programme self-financing.
The recall of a device frequently indicates a high potential for serious problems. Random
inspection during actual recall incidents would verify the true efficiency and effectiveness
of the procedures and ensure that vendors fulfil their responsibilities.
Mandatory problem reporting requires that serious problems are reported and relayed
to other users for preventive purposes. However, there seems to be a concern among users
that the information given in medical device problem reporting can become a personal
legal liability if it turns out the problem was actually caused by the incorrect use of the
device. This means there is a general reluctance to report problems associated with the
use of medical devices even where such reporting is mandatory by law, e.g. in the United
States and some countries in Europe. Regulatory authorities both in Europe and North
America are experiencing a lack of cooperation from device users. Therefore, the
government should address this issue with a problem solving rather than “finger pointing”
approach. Above all, it is critical that the dissemination of information to the public must
be handled with great discretion so that it does not unduly damage the reputation of a
health care professional, the health care institution or the company/manufacturer. The
GHTF has a guidance document (SG2 N8R4) that provides advice in such delicate cases.
The following quotations from this document lists the concerns that should be considered
before releasing information nationally:
1. is the information collected, or received, of relevance nationally?
2. if yes, for whom? – other authorities/manufacturer/distributor/user/hospitals/patients/
academics/the public?
3. can the persons, natural or legal, who should have the information be traced and located
and given information directly?
4. will information have to be released to the public in order to reach the persons who
need it, but whom cannot be reached directly?
5. does the public need this information?
6. is the information of use, or of benefit, to the public at large?
It is important for regulatory authorities to communicate with other countries to keep
themselves informed about incidents that have not occurred locally. WHO follows Standard
Operating Procedures for the issuing of alerts among Member States, and may also work
with the GHTF to assist in the appropriate dissemination of information to countries.
Risk management becomes more effective with a larger population database. There will
be a need to exchange information with other regulatory authorities, and this should be
done in a meaningful and systematic manner. The GHTF guidance document SG2 N20R10
provides advice on how to determine if and when a regulatory authority should consider
sharing information globally.
Complaints are an early indication of potential problems, and they should not be ignored.
Proper investigation may lead to the discovery of more serious problems. However,
interpreting the degree of urgency of a complaint may demand considerable technicalknowledge and experience. It is essential to involve the manufacturer/vendor and the user
in the investigation. User errors can be minimized through design incorporating human
factor principles and user experience can help manufacturers to improve product safety.
For local production, a government can take advantage of the quality system approach
(see sections 3.4.4 and 6.3.3). The key is to ensure that the quality system registrars or
notified bodies are accredited by national competent authorities (see section 5.5) and that
applicable quality standards are used for the classified medical devices.


6.6 Cautions in interpreting medical device “export certificates”
Importers should be well aware of the fact that there are different kinds of certificates
that testify the characteristics of medical devices being exported. For example, Canada
currently has two kinds of certificates applicable to medical devices; Japan has three, and
the United States has four. These are briefly described below:


Canada
1. The Canadian Export Certificate for Medical Devices. This certificate allows vendors to
export medical devices that are not manufactured for sale or consumption in Canada.
This certificate has legal status (Section 37 of the Food and Drug Act and Section 89 of
the Medical Devices Regulations). (The United States issues analogous certificates under
Sections 801 and 802 of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, see below)
2. The Canadian Manufacturer’s Certificate for Medical Devices. This certificate requires
the manufacturers to make the following declaration before a commissioner or a notary:
a. Each device is manufactured, produced and sold in Canada in accordance with the
requirements of Canada’s Food and Drug Act and Regulations thereunder; and
b. tests have been conducted in respect of each device and that the tests indicate that
the nature of the benefits claimed to be obtainable through the use of each device
and the performance characteristics of each device are justified.
This declaration is submitted to Health Canada for verification and counter-signature
for compliance.


Japan
1. The Evaluation and Licensing Division (MHLW) can issue “Export Certificate (FSC)”
for a medical device that has been approved by the MHLW. This is the certificate to
confirm that the product was manufactured under the PAL requirement (GMP) and
has the approval to be sold in Japan. (Yakuhatsu #418/422)
2. There are two other certificates: one is to certify “Approved Manufacturer” by the
MHLW; the other is to certify that the product was manufactured under the PAL
requirement (GMP) in Japan.
These certificates can be requested by the importing country.


The United States of America
1. The United States “Export Certificate” Section 801(e)(2) grants permission for the export
of unapproved medical devices which are not equivalent to devices cleared for marketing
in the USA, after the firm has submitted to the FDA proof of safety of the device and
obtained a letter from the foreign government granting permission to import the device.
2. The United States “Certificate of Exportability” Section 801(e)(1) certifies the export of
devices that are not approved for use within the USA, distribution of which would beconsidered adulterated or misbranded under U.S. law because they lack marketing
permission, U.S. labelling, and/or are not being manufactured under QS Regulation.
These devices must be equivalent in design and intended use to class I and II medical
devices already granted marketing permission by FDA, labelled for export, and must
be in compliance with the specification of the purchaser and the laws of the foreign
country.
3. The United States “Certificate of Exportability” Section 802 certifies the export of
unapproved devices which are manufactured in compliance with the requirements of
the QS Regulation or equivalent FDA recognized international standard and which are
authorized for marketing in a “tier one” country. Tier one countries included those in
the European Union, the European Economic Area, Australia, Canada, Israel, Japan,
New Zealand and South Africa.
4. The United States “Certificate to Foreign Government” is issued for devices that are legally
marketed in the U.S. and in compliance with the Food, Drug & Cosmetic Act.


The World Health Organization
The widely used WHO Export Certificate at present applies only to pharmaceutical products.


Comments
The Canadian Export Certificate and the United States certificates all impose the condition
that the exported device does not contravene any known requirement of the laws of the
importing country. However, this does not provide protections for countries that do not
have regulations or a national policy on medical device acceptance. Countries are therefore
urged to use these guidelines to develop or reinforce their national medical device regulatory
authority so that their populations are protected against unsafe products.

CHAPTER 7

Priorities on the international agenda

In order to minimize substandard medical devices in global trade, there is a need to establish
a uniform format for different countries to certify that the medical device being exported
complies with their domestic regulatory requirements.
This certification process will greatly help importing countries to control medical devices.
One option for generating this certificate could be to follow the same process as that used
to develop the WHO Export Certificate for Pharmaceutical Products, with detailed item
descriptions tailored to medical devices.
Post-market surveillance/vigilance is essential to ensure that medical devices in use
continue to be safe and effective. Because of the worldwide increase in the use of medical
devices, the ability to access coordinated and analysed global post-market surveillance/
vigilance data would greatly enhance medical device safety. Participation and reporting
criteria may be based on the recommendations of the GHTF Study Group 2 (see Annex 2).
International agencies, and the governments and industries of major medical device
producing countries could consider supporting the establishment of this global shared
database, under the leadership of an international body.


The Global Harmonization Task Force: www.ghtf.org
It provides general information and reports from the four study groups. It also offers
an extensive list of web sites of countries around the world.
Australia: Therapeutic Goods Administration: www.health.gov.au/tga
Canada: Health Canada site: www.hc-sc.gc.ca
All medical devices guidance documents and medical device related information can be
obtained from www.hc-sc.gc.ca/hpfb-dgpsa/tpd-dpt/
European Union: http://europa.eu.int/comm/enterprise/medical_devices/index.htm
EU Member States with a different linguistic regime:
France: www.afssaps.sante.fr/
Germany: www.bfarm.de/de/index.php
Spain: www.msc.es/farmacia/home.htm
Japan: Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare: www.mhlw.go.jp/english/index.html
For publications: www.mac.doc.gov/japan/source/menu/medpharm/medpub.html
United Kingdom: www.Medical-devices.gov.uk
United States of America: Food and Drug Administration: www.fda.gov/default.htm
Corresponding medical device-related information site: www.fda.gov/cdrh/index.html.
(this site also offers “Device Advice” – www.fda.gov/cdrh/devadvice/ – a self-service
site for medical device and radiation product information)
The FDA enforcement report site: www.fda.gov/opacom/Enforce.html also offers useful
information for import control.


Some addresses to obtain Medical Device Incident Reporting Forms
International
Adverse event and Product Defect Reporting Systems
ECRI (formerly the Emergency Care Research Institute)
WHO Collaborating Centre
www.ecri.org
E-mail: accidents@ecri.org
Tel: +1 610 825 6000, ext 5223

United Kingdom
Adverse Incident Centre
Medicines & Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency
Hannibal House, Elephant & Castle
London SE1 6TQ
Tel hotline: +44 20 7972 8080
Fax: +44 20 7972 8109
E-mail: aic@mhra.gsi. gov.uk


Australia
Medical Device Problems and Adverse Events
Therapeutic Goods Administration
PO Box 100
Woden ACT 2606
Tel: +61 (02) 6232 8713
Fax: +61 (02) 6232 8555
E-mail: iris@health.gov.au
www.health.gov.au/tga/docs/html/therprob.htm


Reuse, refurbished, home-use, donated, and maintenance of medical devices
Reuse of medical devices that are labelled single-use
Enforcement Priorities for Single-Use Devices Reprocessed by Third Parties and Hospitals
August 14, 2000 www.fda.gov/cdrh/reuse/1168.html
Frequently-Asked-Questions about the Reprocessing and Reuse of Single-Use Devices by
Third Party and Hospital Reprocessors: Food and Drug Administration (USA)
www.fda.gov/cdrh/reuse/reuse-faq.html
Special Report: Reuse of Single-Use Medical Devices: Making Informed Decisions: ECRI
(USA), info@ecri.org
Reuse of Single-Use Medical Devices in Canadian Acute-Care HealthCare Facilities:
Canadian Healthcare Association, http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/
Single-use Medical Devices: Implications and Consequences of Reuse: Medicines and
Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (UK) www.medical-devices.gov.uk/
Patients in Danger: The Reuse of Single-Use Medical Devices in Europe: European
Confederation of Medical Devices Associations, Belgium: www.eucomed.be/
Reuse of Single Use Devices, 1999 Conference Proceedings and Tapes: Association for the
Advancement of Medical Instrumentation (USA) www.aami.org/resources/reuse/
index.html


medical device can range from a simple wooden tongue
depressor or stethoscope to the most sophisticated implants
or medical imaging devices. In general, a medical device is an
instrument, apparatus, or machine used to prevent, diagnose or
treat disease. It also serves to detect, measure, restore or modify
the structure or function of the body for a given health purpose.
Typically a medical device achieves its purpose without entering
metabolic pathways.
Optimum safety and performance require cooperation among all
involved in the life span of a medical device: the government, the
manufacturer, the importer/vendor, the user and the public – each
has a specific role to play in this risk management.
Many countries procure medical devices that may be sub-standard.
Some manufacturers of medical devices may also be unaware of
minimum standards. Governments that are unable to carry out
pre-market review, either for imported devices or those manufactured locally, could assure regulatory compliance by taking
advantage of the work of major device manufacturing countries.
A priority in local regulatory development should be the establishment of vendor and product registrations.
Education and training of users, and the continued assessment
of medical devices in use is as important as product control. It is
critical to have access to a system for informing and collaborating
with the manufacturer, vendor, all users, the public and relevant
international organizations of hazards/issues related to medical
devices.


WORDS OF ADVICE
■ Collaborate with all stakeholders to establish a clear and
comprehensive national policy on medical devices
■ Adopt recommendations on global harmonization for
regulatory requirements and procedures
■ Ensure that classified medical devices are manufactured
in conformity with applicable quality system standards
■ Link to networks that monitor medical devices and
participate in post-market surveillance and medical device
alert issues


✓Checklist
■
Government
■ Commitment and support
■ Ensure mechanisms for recognition of
and conformity assessment with
national/international standards
■ Develop and implement national
policies
■ Ensure the safety and performance of
medical devices in use
■ Link to international alert system
■ Establish regulatory authority on medical
devices for:
● Basic acceptance criteria: requirements on safety and performance,
quality systems, packaging and
labelling
● Import control
● Local production control
● Vendor and product registration
● Post-market surveillance
● User education
● Clear policy on donations
● Regular review of policy/standards


Manufacturers
■ Comply with recommendations on
global harmonization for regulatory
requirements and procedures
■ Undergo testing or clinical trials to
substantiate intended benefit
■ Ensure labelling and packaging
requirements


Importer/vendor
■ Ensure product complies with regulatory
requirements
■ Avoid making misleading claims
■ Maintain device distribution records
■ Provide user support
■ Fulfil all after-sales obligations


User
■ Secure and follow adequate training
■ Monitor safety and performance of
device on continuous basis
■ Ensure regular calibration and
maintenance
■ Share information and problems
■ Assure appropriate waste disposal


Public
■ Become informed and insist on safe,
effective, quality, affordable and
sustainable products

KEY ELEMENTS
National medical device regulatory or monitoring programme
The following diagram provides an overview of the different phases in the life span of a medical device. The phases
shown may overlap or interact but each can affect safety. Since most developing countries import medical devices,
priority should be given to vendor and product registrations, user training and post-market surveillance of devices (correct
use, problem alerts and recalls). Although in-country pre-market product control requires resources and expertise,
governments could benefit from the work of major medical device manufacturing countries to assure regulatory compliance.
International sharing of information on alert systems for medical devices is essential as risk management is more effective
with a large population database.


Close cooperation is needed with the
manufacturer/importer of the
product. Important activities include:


A national database on vendors and
products is essential for effective
control of medical devices. Important activities include:


Correct use is the ultimate determinant of safety and effectiveness.
Important activities include:


● Vendor registration

● Regular maintenance of devices in

● Product registration

accordance with operation and
service manuals
● User networks and medical device
vigilance systems to facilitate alert
notification
● Adequate management and
disposal of discarded devices

● Collaboration on acceptance

criteria (see checklist overleaf)
● Collaboration on international
quality systems and productspecific standards
● Agreement on systems for
conformity assessments
● Clinical trials/testing
● Appropriate and effective customs
control system on imported
medical devices


● Prohibition of fraudulent/


misleading advertising
● After sales obligations, including:

— distribution records
— complaint handling
— problem reporting
— recall procedures


● Training of user before use

* includes testing and clinical trials

RECOGNITION AND USE OF NATIONAL AND INTERNATIONAL STANDARDS
Regulations address essential safety and performance principles (see Global Harmonization Task Force web site, Doc
SG1-N020R5). Detailed technical requirements and characteristics are provided by voluntary product standards developed
by national and international expert groups (see ISO TR 16142:1999). The international quality systems standard for
medical device manufacturing is ISO 13485. Governments should have a procedure to recognize and publicize standards
as a guide for all stakeholders. While certain technical standards can be specified by specialists, in general good standards
have the following attributes:
■ their development has been overseen by a recognized body ensuring that the process is transparent and not dominated
by untoward interests.
■ the development process has been open to input from all interested parties and the resulting document based on
consensus. Consensus, in a practical sense, means that significant agreement is reached in the preparation of a standard,
including steps taken to resolve all objections. This implies more than a majority, but not necessarily unanimity.
■ good technical standards are based on consolidated results in science, technology and experience, and aimed at the
promotion of optimum community benefits.
■ standards do not hinder innovation and must be periodically reviewed to remain in tune with technological advances.


Devices intended for global use should follow international standards (ISO, IEC). A standard can be recognized fully or
partially, provided this is clearly specified. Several standards can also be recognized to satisfy the require-ments of a
particular device. Conformity of a device can be assessed by accredited third party agencies, such as a notified body. In
some countries, the publication of government recognized standards mandates product compliance.
